
# 5 m Quadrats

## Purpose

+ To determine the abundance of selected rare, clumped and/or sedentary indicator species

## Materials

+ 2 dive slates with pencils

+ 2 underwater 5 m quadrat sheets (one each: quadrats 0-20 and quadrats 21-40)

+ 2 metal meter sticks

## Personnel

+ 2 SCUBA equipped observers experienced in the identification and search image needed for species listed in Table 6.

## Time Required

+ Approximately 35 minutes of dive time is required.

## Methods

+ Note: no invasive sampling (turning over rocks) is conducted in any KFM methodology, with the exception that sea urchins are removed from crevices to locate and measure smaller sea urchins underneath the spine canopy.  

The 100 m transect is divided into 40 quadrats 5 m in length and 1 m wide. Each quadrat is marked with red electrical tape at each 5 m increment along the 100 m transect line. The first quadrat is 0-5 m, the second quadrat is 5-10 m, etc. (Figure 19), with quadrats 1-20 on one side of the line and 21-40 on the other side.  Each diver samples opposite sides of the transect line resulting in 40 quadrats total.

One diver has the quadrats 0-20 datasheet and sample one side of the transect line while the other diver has the quadrats 21-40 datasheet and sample the other side. The datasheets do not correspond to a certain side of the transect so divers may pick to swim on either side of the transect line. Always starting at the zero end of the transect line, divers swim side by side towards the 100 m end of the transect and record the total number of each species indicated on the datasheet for the corresponding quadrat using the meter sticks to determine the width of each quadrat (Figure 20). An organism must be 50% or more inside of quadrat to be counted. After returning to the surface, divers should check their own 5 m quadrat sheet as well as their dive partners for readability and outliers. Datasheets are rinsed, allowed to air dry and stored in the completed datasheet notebook. The raw datasheets are used for data entry in the office before being filed in the datasheet cabinets.
 
At the bottom of Table 6 is a list of “Write-In” species. These are species that are only present at a few sites in high enough densities to warrant counting on quadrats. Also, there is not enough room on the datasheet to include a separate column for each of them. The lead biologist may instruct divers to collect quadrat data for one or two of these species prior to the dive. The divers collecting quadrat data can also decide to count a “write-in” species after assessing the site at the beginning of the dive. However, it is important that the divers communicate to each other to count the write-in species. Both divers must collect density data for the write-in species in all quadrats for the data to be used. The species name can be written in the blank column at the right side of the 5 m quadrat datasheet.


